Conditions for terminated pod (#4577)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4576-conditions-for-pod-terminated/README.md

marked as `provisional` is a working document and subject to change. You can
denote sections that are under active debate as follows:

```
<<[UNRESOLVED optional short context or usernames ]>>
Stuff that is being argued.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

When editing KEPS, aim for tightly-scoped, single-topic PRs to keep discussions
focused. If you disagree with what is already in a document, open a new PR
with suggested changes.

One KEP corresponds to one "feature" or "enhancement" for its whole lifecycle.
You do not need a new KEP to move from beta to GA, for example. If
new details emerge that belong in the KEP, edit the KEP. Once a feature has become
"implemented", major changes should get new KEPs.

The canonical place for the latest set of instructions (and the likely source
of this file) is [here](/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md).

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable`, or significant changes once
it is marked `implementable`, must be approved by each of the KEP approvers.
If none of those approvers are still appropriate, then changes to that list
should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or
SIG Architecture for cross-cutting KEPs).
-->

> # KEP-4576: Condition PodTerminated added for pod

Reviewer: Main concern with this proposal so far is the name of this condition.

Terminated in this case seems to be mean that the pod is either succeeded or failed. If a pod is preempted/disrupted/manually deleted, then I also consider that terminating. I think we may move these to failed (@mimowo ?) but I find it weird that this condition would be "PodTerminated" if it is Failed Or Succeeded.

Generally I think you want this condition because you want to say that the pod resources are ready to be cleaned up in case of pvc manager.

Names for these are always tricky so I may suggest a few options in the review.

I propose `PodComplete` or `PodTerminal` as an option.

Reviewer: Mostly that are all cases where pods are terminated (deleted, preempted) mean that we can safetly assume that they are represented by Failed or Succeeded state.

Author: > > Terminated in this case seems to be mean that the pod is either succeeded or failed.
> > ...
> > I propose PodComplete or PodTerminal as an option.
> 
> Personally I like `PodTerminated` as it is concise, and IIUC the resource cleanups happen in [`SyncTerminatedPod`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/cae35dba5a3060711a2a3f958537003bc74a59c0/pkg/kubelet/kubelet.go#L2137). Alternative concise name that comes to my mind is `PodFinished`, which would also correspond to the kubelet's internal naming [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/cae35dba5a3060711a2a3f958537003bc74a59c0/pkg/kubelet/status/status_manager.go#L63-L64).

+1

Reviewer 2: There is an additional need to convey when a pod starts terminating in order to remove it from endpoints.  In that [problem description](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1t25jgO_-LRHhjRXf4KJ5xY_t8BZYdapv7MDAxVGY6R8/edit?usp=sharing) I propose an approach that would support what this KEP requests as well as the issue that all terminating pods need to be removed from endpoints to prevent traffic from being sent to already terminated pods.

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--

> This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused

Reviewer: I usually suggest people remove comments once they finish the section as it helps with reviewers. Shortens the text.

reached a state where it's containers have terminated.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

There are two phases, Succeeded and Failed, which are used to indicate that 
all containers in the pod have been terminated.  
When all containers of the pod are terminated, the kubelet will update the phase of 
the pod to Succeeded or Failed in the SyncPod,  in which case it is not safe to remove the corresponding resource dependencies 
such as pvc protection, because the phase of the pod may already be in the Succeeded or Failed state 
but the volumes are not unmounted(the umount process is asynchronous with the pod's phase change).

A new dedicated condition `PodTerminated` indicate that
all containers in the pod have been terminated and corresponding resource dependencies have been processed

> - volumes are unmounted

Reviewer: Please link to some issues that caused this KEP to be proposed.

- secrets are unregistered
- configmaps are unregistered
- cgroups are removed
- userns are released

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
--> 
Custom pod controllers/operators can use a dedicated condition `PodTerminated` indicating
a pod has
reached a state where it's containers have terminated and corresponding resource dependencies have been processed.

> 

Reviewer: Should we consider solving the that created this in this KEP also?

Author: > Should we consider solving the that created this in this KEP also?

Do you meaning this issue https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/120756?

Reviewer: Yes.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

##### Story 1: Remove pvc protection when pod reaches a completed state

> The PVC can be safely deleted when a job that mounts a PVC reaches a completed state.

Reviewer: Citation needed (you can link to the issue).

> The PVC can be safely deleted when a job that mounts a PVC reaches a completed state.

Reviewer 3: Is this maybe the issue that motivates the KEP: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/120917?

Reviewer: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/120756 is the one I am aware of.

```
status:
  conditions:
  ...
  - lastProbeTime: null
    lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-14T15:33:47Z"
    status: "False"
    type: PodTerminated
  - lastProbeTime: null
    lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-14T15:33:46Z"
    status: "True"
    type: PodScheduled
```

> 

Reviewer: Again, this KEP reads that we are proposing a condition. External controllers could use this condition but do you want to consider using this to solve the user story you had in mind?

Author: Updated.

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

A review of the existing E2E tests reveal that coverage of the basic, existing
pod conditions (populated by Kubelet) is sparse. While the existing pod
conditions are quite mature.

##### Unit tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit
This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

Every added code should have complete unit test coverage.

> 

Reviewer: Follow the instructions above and mention code coverage for the code you are going to touch.

-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP proposes a
`PodTerminated` condition in pod status to indicate a pod has
reached a state where it's containers have terminated.

## Motivation

Today, there are two phases, `Succeeded` and `Failed`, which are used to indicate that
all containers in the pod have been terminated.  
The kubelet may update the phase of
the pod to `Succeeded` or `Failed` in the [SyncPod](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/dc3f5ec6ccb9855dfa99f4c1078625df5fdfab6a/pkg/kubelet/kubelet.go#L1723)
and  waits for the corresponding resource dependencies to be cleanup in the [SyncTerminatedPod](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/dc3f5ec6ccb9855dfa99f4c1078625df5fdfab6a/pkg/kubelet/kubelet.go#L2146)
when all containers of the pod are terminated. In this case it is not safe to remove
[pvc protection](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/120756)
because the phase of the pod already be in the `Succeeded` or `Failed` state 

> but the volumes are not unmounted(the umount process is asynchronous with the pod's phase change).

Reviewer 3: I'm wondering if this issue is really about async unmounting of volumes, it it was I assume the pvc could be deleted soon after the pod is transitioned to `Failed`. However, it stays `Terminating` for a long time, so I don't see a clear connection between the issue and the condition.

Author: @mimowo PTAL at https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/123320.

Author: Because we don't have the right signals to determine when a volume has finished unmounting from the node, that means we cannot remove the finalizer protection.

Reviewer 3: I might ask lame questions, as I'm not a sig-node expert - I just got interested in the KEP as it is close to the topics and code I was touching in the past. So, the question was just to build my understanding rather than pointing out flaws. 

Let me ask a follow up question in the similar spirit - what will happen if we remove the "finializer protection" while the pod is in terminal phase (say Failed), but the volumes are not unmounted yet? Would it be problematic?

Author: @mimowo Interesting, I'll do some testing.

functionality is accessed.

[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha

> - Kubelet will report pod conditions if the feature flag `PodTerminated` is enabled.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- kubelet will report pod terminated conditions if the feature gate `PodTerminatedCondition` is enabled.
```

Author: Thanks.
